---
title: "Abreaction"
tags:
- example-tag
enableToc: false # do not show a table of contents on this page
---

= D.: Abreagieren.–Es.: abreacción.–Fr.: abréaction.–I: abreazione.–P.: ab-reação.


Emotional discharge whereby the subject liberates himself from the [[affect]] attached to the memory of a traumatic event in such a way that this affect is snot able to become (or to remain) pathogenic. Abreaction may be provoked in the course of psychotherapy, especially under hypnosis, and produce a [[Catharsis|cathartic]] effect. It may also come about spontaneously, either a short or a long interval after the original [[trauma]].
The notion of abreaction can only be understood by reference to Freud’s theory of the genesis of the hysterical symptom, as set out in his paper ‘On the Psychical Mechanism of Hysterical Phenomena’ (1893a) (la, a). The persistence of the affect attached to a memory depends on several factors, of which the most important is related to the way in which the subject has reacted to a particular event. Such a reaction may be composed of voluntary or involuntary responses, and may range in nature from tears to acts of revenge. Where this reaction is of sufficient intensity a large part of the affect associated with the event disappears; it is when the reaction is [[Suppression|suppressed]] (unterdrückt) that the affect remains [[Binding|bound]] to the memory.
Abreaction is thus the normal way for the subject to react to an event and to ensure that it does not keep too great a quota of [[affect]]. For the reaction to be cathartic, however, it has to be ‘adequate’.
Abreaction may be spontaneous; in other words, it may come about fairly shortly after the event and prevent the memory from being so burdened with a great quota of affect that it becomes pathogenic. Alternatively, it may be secondary, precipitated by a cathartic psychotherapy which enables the patient to recall the traumatic event, to put it into words and so deliver himself from the weight of affect which has been the cause of his pathological condition. As early as 1895, in fact, Freud noted that ‘language serves as a substitute for action; by its help, an affect can be “abreacted” almost as effectively’ (1b).
A massive abreaction is not the only way for a subject to get rid of the memory of a traumatic event; the memory may be integrated into a series of associations which allows the event to be corrected–to be put in its proper place. From the Studies on Hysteria(1895d) onwards, we find Freud speaking on occasion of the actual effort of recollection and mental working out’ as a process of abreaction in which the same affect is revived at the memory of each of the different events which have given rise to it (1c).
The effect of an absence of abreaction is the persistence of the groups of [[Idea (or Presentation or Representation)|ideas]] which lie at the root of neurotic symptoms; they remain unconscious and isolated from the normal course of thought: ‘… the ideas which have become pathological have persisted with such freshness and affective strength because they have been denied the normal wearing-away processes by means of abreaction and reproduction in states of uninhibited association’ (1d).
Breuer and Freud were concerned to identify the different sets of conditions which prevent the subject from abreacting. They felt that in certain cases these sets of conditions were related not to the nature of the event, but rather to the mental state of the subject at the moment of its occurrence: [[fright]], autohypnosis or [[hypnoid state]]. Alternatively, their origin was sometimes to be found in the circumstances–usually of a social nature–which oblige the subject to restrain his reactions. A final possibility was that there were ‘things which the patient wished to forget, and therefore intentionally repressed from his conscious thought and inhibited and suppressed’ (le). These three different sets of conditions defined the three types of hysteria: hypnoid [[hysteria]], [[retention hysteria]] and [[defence hysteria]]. It was immediately after the publication of the Studies on Hysteria that Freud abandoned the first two of these three types.
* * *

The exclusive emphasis on abreaction as the key to psychotherapeutic effectiveness is above all typical of the period in Freud’s work which is known as the period of the cathartic method. Yet the notion is retained in the later theory of psycho-analytic treatment. There are empirical reasons for its survival, for every cure involves manifest emotional discharge, though to varying degrees according to the type of patient. There are theoretical reasons too, in so far as every theory of the cure must take into account [[repetition]] as well as recollection. Concepts such as [[transference]], [[working-through]] and [[acting out]] all imply some reference to the theory of abreaction, even though they also lead us to more complex conceptions of treatment than the idea of a pure and simple elimination of the traumatising affect.
(α) The neologism ‘abreagieren’ seems to have been coined by Freud and Breuer from the verb reagieren in its transitive use and the prefix ab-, which has several meanings, particularly distance in time, the fact of separation, diminishment, suppression etc.
(1) BREUER, J. and FREUD, S.: a)Cf. G.W., I, 81–9; S.E., II, 3–10. b) G.W., I, 87; S.E., II, 8. c) G.W.,I, 223–4; S.E., II, 158. d) G.W., I,90; S.E., II, 11. e) G.W., I, 89; S.E., II, 10.