---
title: "Acting Out"
tags:
- example-tag
enableToc: false # do not show a table of contents on this page
---

= D.: Agieren.–Es.: actuar.–Fr.: mise en acte; acting out.–I: agire.–P.: agir

According to Freud, action in which the subject, in the grip of his unconscious wishes and phantasies, relives these in the present with a sensation of immediacy which is heightened by his refusal to recognise their source and their repetitive character.
Such action generally displays an impulsive aspect relatively out of harmony with the subject’s usual motivational patterns, and fairly easy to isolate from the overall trends of his activity. Acting out often takes the form of aggressive behaviour directed either at the self or at others. When it occurs in the course of analysis–whether during the actual session or not–acting out should be understood in its relationship to the [[transference]], and often as a basic refusal to acknowledge this transference.
‘Agieren,’ a term of Latin origin which Freud uses both verbally and substantially, is not a part of German common usage. For referring to action or acting German prefers such words as ‘die Tat’ ‘tun’, ‘die Wirkung’ etc. Freud employs ‘agieren ’ transitively–as he does ‘abreagieren’, which has the same root (see ‘Abreaction’); its object (i.e. what is ‘acted out’) is instincts, phantasies, wishes, etc.
‘Agieren’ is nearly always coupled with ‘[[memory-trace|erinnern]], to remember, the two being contrasting ways of bringing the past into the present.
Freud observed this contrast essentially in the context of the treatment, with the result that it is repetition in the transference that he most often refers to as ‘acting out’: the patient ‘acts it before us, as it were, instead of reporting it to us’ (la). Acting out extends beyond the transference proper, however: ‘We must be prepared to find, therefore, that the patient yields to the compulsion to [[repetition|repeat]], which now replaces the compulsion to remember, not only in his personal attitude to his doctor but also in every other activity and relationship which may occupy his life at the time–if, for instance, he falls in love or undertakes a task or starts an enterprise during the treatment’ (2).
The term ‘acting out’ enshrines an ambiguity that is actually intrinsic to Freud’s thinking here: he fails to distinguish the element of actualisation in the transference from the resort to motor action–which the transference (q.v.) does not necessarily entail. It is hard to see, for example, how Freud was able to go on being satisfied, as a way of accounting for repetition in the transference, with the metapsychological model of motility he had put forward as early as The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a): ‘…the fact of transference, as well as the psychoses, show us that [unconscious wishes] endeavour to force their way by way of the preconscious system into consciousness and to obtain control of the power of movement’ (3).
The confusion may be further illustrated by the following definition of acting out, offered by English and English in their Comprehensive Dictionary of Psychological and Psychoanalytical Terms :‘manifesting the purposive behaviour appropriate to an older situation in a new situation which symbolically represents it. Cf. transference, which is a form of acting out.’ This definition conflicts with the most commonly held psycho-analytic view, which treats the domain of the transference and recourse to acting out as distinct if not actually opposed to one another, the latter being looked upon as an attempt to break off the analytic relationship.
* * *

From the descriptive point of view, the range of actions ordinarily classified as acting out is very wide. At one pole are violent, aggressive and criminal acts–murder, suicide, sexual assault, etc.–where the subject is deemed to proceed from an idea or tendency to the corresponding act (the passage à l’acte of French clinical psychiatry); at the other extreme we find much more subdued forms–although the impulsive aspect must still be evident: the act is ill-motivated even in the subject’s own eyes, constituting a radical departure from his usual behaviour even if he rationalises it after the fact. For the psycho-analyst indications such as these betoken the [[return of the repressed]]. Also placed under the rubric of acting out are certain accidents which befall subjects who feel they have no part in bringing them about. Giving such a broad connotation to ‘acting out’ naturally makes a problem of the concept’s delimitation: it has only been marked off from other concepts forged by Freud (notably from [[parapraxis]] and so-called repetition phenomena) in a manner which tends to be vague and to vary from one author to the next (α). Parapraxes too are sharply distinct and isolated, but–at any rate in the most prototypical form–their nature as [[compromise-formation|compromise formations]] is patent. By contrast, in lived-out repetition phenomena (e.g. ‘fate compulsions’), the repressed contents often return in a scenario of great fidelity whose authorship the subject fails to recognise as his own.
* * *

One of the achievements of psycho-analysis has been to bring the occurrence of specific impulsive acts into relation with the dynamics of the treatment and the transference. This line of advance was clearly indicated by Freud when he underscored the tendency of certain patients to ‘act out’ the instinctual impulses aroused during the analytic session outside the consulting room. But inasmuch as Freud, as we have seen, describes even transference on to the analyst as a modality of acting out, he fails either to differentiate clearly or to show the interconnections between repetition phenomena in the transference on the one hand and manifestations of acting out on the other. The distinction he does propose is apparently meant as a solution to problems of a predominantly technical nature: the subject who acts out conflicts outside the treatment has less chance of becoming aware of their repetitive character and he is in a position, since he is free of any control or interpretation by the analyst, to satisfy his repressed instincts to the limit–i.e. to complete the act in question: ‘We think it most undesirable if the patient acts (agiert) outside the transference instead of remembering. The ideal conduct for our purposes would be that he should behave as normally as possible outside the treatment and express his abnormal reactions only in the transference’ (lb).
One of the outstanding tasks of psycho-analysis is to ground the distinction between transference and acting out on criteria other than purely technical ones–or even mere considerations of locale (does something happen within the consulting room or not?). This task presupposes a reformulation of the concepts of action and actualisation and a fresh definition of the different modalities of communication.
Only when the relations between acting out and the analytic transference have been theoretically clarified will it be possible to see whether the structures thus exposed can be extrapolated from the frame of reference of the treatment–to decide, in other words, whether light can be shed on the impulsive acts of everyday life by linking them to relationships of the transference type.
(α) Such a demarcation has to be made if the notion of acting out is to preserve any specificity and escape assimilation into a generalised conception which does no more than point up the more or less close relationship that exists between any human project and unconscious phantasies.


(1) FREUD, S. An Outline of Psycho-Analysis (1940a [1938]): a) G.W., XVII, 101; S.E., XXIII, 176. b) G.W., XVII, 103; S.E., XXIII, 177.
(2) FREUD, S. ‘Remembering, Repeating and Working-Through’ (1914g), G.W., X, 130; S.E.,XII,151.
(3) FREUD, S., G.W.,II-III, 573; S.E., V, 567.