---
title: "Active Technique"
tags:
- example-tag
enableToc: false # do not show a table of contents on this page
---

= D.: aktive Technik.–Es.: técnica activa.–Fr.: technique active.–I.: tecnica attiva.–P,: técnica ativa.

Set of technical procedures recommended by Ferenczi: the analyst ceases to confine his action to [[interpretation]] and formulates injunctions and prohibitions with regard to certain repetitive behaviour by the analysand, which may occur within the treatment or outside it, whenever such behaviour is procuring satisfactions for him of a Maud likely to Mock recollection and hold up the treatment’s progress.

In the history of psycho-analysis the idea of active technique and the term itself are associated with the name of Sandor Ferenczi. Ferenczi first raised the topic in connection with larval forms of masturbation which are encountered in the analysis of cases of hysteria and which it is desirable to prohibit; indeed the patient may ‘attach all his pathogenic phantasies to them, short-circuit them constantly by motor discharge, and thus save himself the irksome and unpleasant task of bringing them to consciousness’ (la). Ferenczi stresses that recourse to prohibitions of this kind is intended solely to help get out of dead ends in the work of analysis; and he invokes the precedent set by Freud when he enjoined phobic patients, at a certain point in their analysis, to confront the phobia-producing situation (1b, 2).

At the 1920 Congress in The Hague, encouraged by approval from Freud, who had formulated the rule of [[Abstinence (Rule of)|abstinence]] at the Budapest Congress the year before, Ferenczi presented an overview of his active therapy. This comprises two phases which are supposed to permit the activation and control of erotic tendencies–even where these have been sublimated. The first of these phases consists of injunctions designed to transform repressed instinctual impulses into a manifest satisfaction, so making them into fully conscious formations. The second one consists of prohibitions regarding these same formations; by this time the analyst is able to relate the activities and affects brought out by the first phase to infantile situations.

Theoretically speaking, the resort to active measures is justified as follows: in contrast to the [[Cathartic Method (or Therapy)]], where the emergence of a memory brings on an emotional reaction, the active method, by provoking [[Acting Out|acting out]] and the manifestation of the [[affect]], facilitates the [[return of the repressed]]. ‘It is […] possible that certain early infantile […] contents […] can not be simply remembered at all, but can only be reproduced by a re-living’ (3).

From a technical point of view, Ferenczi considers that one should resort to active measures only in exceptional cases, for a very limited time, solely if the transference has become a compulsion, and mainly towards the end of the treatment. Finally, he stresses that he intends no modification of the [[fundamental rule]]:.instead, the ‘artifices’ he suggests are meant to make it easier to observe the rule.
Later on, Ferenczi considerably broadened the scope of active measures (4). In a short work written in collaboration with Otto Rank, The Development of Psycho-Analysis (1924), he offers an interpretation of the progress of the treatment in terms of the libido which makes a resort to active measures (the laying down of a deadline for the ending of the treatment) a necessity, especially in the final stage (the stage of ‘weaning from the libido’).

Ferenczi was eventually to reverse himself on this point. His final view was that active measures considerably increase the patient’s resistances; by formulating injunctions and prohibitions the analyst plays the part of a parental super-ego, or even of a schoolmaster; as for fixing a deadline for bringing the treatment to a close, the setbacks met with here show that this procedure is rarely called for, and only if the patient agrees with it and if the possibility of revoking the deadline is left open (this goes too for any active measures envisaged) (5). Ferenczi finally abandoned the promotion of active measures entirely: ‘…we must content ourselves with interpreting the patient’s concealed tendencies to action and supporting his feeble attempts to overcome the neurotic inhibitions to which he had hitherto been subject, without pressing or even advising him to take violent measures. If we are patient enough, the patient will himself sooner or later come up with the question whether he should risk making some effort, for example to defy a phobic avoidance. […] In other words, it is the patient himself who must decide the timing of activity, or at any rate give unmistakable indications that the time is ripe for it’ (6).

The active technique is often contrasted with the purely expectant and passive attitude supposedly required by the analytic method. Actually this opposition is forced: for one thing, Ferenczi persistently treated the techniques he proposed as auxiliary to analysis, not as a variant form of it; and further, the analytic method itself does not rule out a certain amount of activity on the part of the analyst (questions, spacing out of the sessions, etc.), and interpretation is active inasmuch as it inevitably has an effect on the flow of associations. The hallmark of active technique is the stress it lays on [[repetition]] in the sense in which Freud contrasted it to remembering: in order to overcome the compulsion to repeat and at last make recollection possible–or at least let the treatment proceed–Ferenczi judged it needful not merely to permit but actually to encourage repetition. This is the basis of the active technique (α).
(α) For a fuller discussion of the subject the reader is referred to Glover’s Technique of Psychoanalysis (1955) (7), which shows that the questions opened by Ferenczi are not yet resolved.

(1) FERENCZI, S. ‘Technical Difficulties in the Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ (1919), in Further Contributions: a) 193. b) Cf. 196.
(2) Cf. FREUD, S. ‘The Future Prospects of Psycho-Analytic Therapy’ (1910d), G.W., VIII, 108–9; S.E., XI, 145.
(3) FERENCZI, S. ‘The Further Development of an Active Therapy in Psycho-Analysis’ (1920), in Further Contributions, 217.
(4) Cf. notably FERENCZI, S. ‘Psycho-Analysis of Sexual Habits’ (1925) and ‘On Forced Phantasies’ (1924), both in Further Contributions, cf. 259–97 and 68–77.
(5). FERENCZI, S. ‘Contra-Indications to the “Active” Psycho-Analytical Technique’ (1925), in Further Contributions, 217–30.
(6) FERENCZI, S. ‘The Elasticity of Psycho-Analytic Technique’ (1928), in Final Contributions, 96–97.
(7) Cf. Chapter IV.