---
title: "Aggressiveness (or Aggression or Aggressivity)"
tags:
- example-tag
enableToc: false # do not show a table of contents on this page
---
= D.: Aggression, Aggressivität.–Es.: agresividad.–Fr: agressivité.–I.: aggressività.–P. agressividade.


Tendency or cluster of tendencies finding expression in real or phantasy behaviour intended to harm other people, or to destroy, humiliate or constrain them, etc. Violent, destructive motor action is not the only form that aggressiveness can take: indeed there is no kind of behaviour that may not have an aggressive function, be it negative–the refusal to lend assistance, for example–or positive; be it symbolic (e.g. irony) or actually carried out. Psycho-analysis has gradually come to give great importance to aggressiveness, showing it to be at work in the early stages of the subject’s development and bringing out the complicated ebb and flow of its fusion with, and defusion from, [[sexuality]]. The culmination of this increasing stress on aggressiveness is the attempt to find a single and basic instinctual underpinning for it in the idea of the [[death instincts|death instinct]].

There is a school of thought which holds that Freud admitted the importance of aggressiveness only at a very late point. Partisans of this view quote Freud himself in support of their claim: ‘Why have we ourselves needed such a long time before we decided to recognise an [[aggressive instinct]]? Why did we hesitate to make use, on behalf of our theory, of facts which were obvious and familiar to everyone?’ (la). These two questions, however, deserve to be treated separately; it is perfectly true that the hypothesis of an autonomous ‘aggressive instinct’ (proposed by Adler as early as 1908) was for a long time rejected by Freud, but it is nevertheless mistaken to suggest that psycho-analytic theory declined to take aggressive behaviour into account until the ‘turning-point’ of 1920.

It is easy to show just how aware of aggressiveness Freud was in a number of areas. In the first place, in the course of treatment, he had very soon encountered the aggressiveness which is the mark of [[resistance]]: ‘… what was to begin with such an excellent, honest fellow, becomes low, untruthful and defiant, and a malingerer–till I tell him so and thus make it possible to overcome this character’ (2). In discussing the case of ‘Dora’ (‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ [1905c]), Freud goes much further and treats the emergence of aggressiveness as an essential feature of the psycho-analytic treatment: under other forms of treatment, ‘a patient will call up affectionate and friendly transferences to help towards his recovery [...], In psycho-analysis, on the other hand, […] all the patient’s motives, including hostile ones, are aroused; they are then turned to account for the purposes of the analysis by being made conscious’ (3). From the outset transference became evident to Freud in the form of resistance–a resistance largely due to what he was to call negative transference (see Transference’).

Clinical experience leaves no doubt that in certain conditions, such as obsessional neurosis and paranoia, hostile tendencies are especially significant. Freud introduces the term ‘[[Ambivalence]]’ to denote the coexistence of love and hate–if not at the most fundamental metapsychological level, then at least in experience. It is worth recalling Freud’s analysis of jokes, where he has this to say: ‘Where a joke is not an aim in itself–that is,. where it is not an innocent one–there are only two purposes that it may serve […]. It is either a hostile joke (serving the purpose of aggressiveness, satire or defence) or an obscene joke’ (4).

Freud speaks several times in this connection of ‘hostile impulses’ or of a ‘hostile trend’. And the [[Oedipus complex]], from the moment of its introduction, is conceived of as a combination of loving and hostile wishes–indeed its first exposition, in The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), comes under the heading of ‘Dreams of the Death of Persons of whom the Dreamer is Fond’. Each step in the progressive elaboration of the Oedipus-complex theory represents an attempt to grasp more fully the interplay between these two kinds of wish within the various forms taken on by the complex.
The variety, range and importance of these phenomena called for an explanation consistent with the first instinct theory. Schematically, Freud’s response to this demand may be said to have several tiers:

a. He declines to postulate a specific instinct to account for these aggressive tendencies and behaviour. It is his view that this would amount to an attribution to a single instinct of something which is in fact the essential characteristic of instinct in general–namely, the fact of its being an inescapable pressure which requires a certain amount of work from the psychical apparatus and which activates motricity. In this sense, if an instinct is to achieve its aims–even where these are ‘passive’ (to be loved, to be looked at, etc.)–an activity is required which may have to overcome obstacles: ‘every instinct is a piece of activity’ (5a).

b. In the first instinct theory, it will be recalled, the [[sexual instinct|sexual instincts]] stand opposed to the [[instincts of self-preservation]]. The latter, generally speaking, have as their function the maintenance and affirmation of the individual’s existence. In this theoretical context an explanation of behaviour or feelings as manifestly aggressive as sadism or hate, say, is sought in a complicated interplay between the two great classes of instincts. To read ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c) is to realise that Freud does have a metapsychological theory of aggressiveness at his disposal at this point. The apparent turning-round of love into hate is a mere illusion: hate is not a negative form of love, for it has its own genesis, which Freud expounds in all its complexity, his central thesis being that ‘the true prototypes of the relation of hate are derived not from sexual life, but from the ego’s struggle to preserve and maintain itself (5b).

c. Finally, in dealing with the self-preservative instincts Freud singles out the activity of assuring mastery over the object, sometimes as a function, sometimes as an autonomous instinct in its own right (see ‘Instinct to Master’[Bemächtigungstrieb]). This concept is seemingly intended to cover an intermediate area lying between the simple activity intrinsic to any function and a trend towards destruction for the sake of destruction. The instinct to master is an independent instinct bound to a specific apparatus (the musculature) and to a specific developmental stage (the [[Anal-Sadistic Stage (or Phase)|anal-sadistic stage]]). But at the same time, ‘injury or annihilation of the object is a matter of indifference’ (5c) to this urge for mastery: the other person and his suffering will only be taken into consideration with the turning-round towards masochism, at which point the instinct to master can no longer be distinguished from the sexual excitation which it arouses (see ‘Sadism/ Masochism’).

* * *

In the final instinct theory aggressiveness plays a more considerable part and comes to occupy a different position.
Freud’s explicit theoretical statements regarding aggressiveness are summed up by the following passage: ‘A portion [of the death instinct] is placed directly in the service of the sexual function, where it has an important part to play. This is sadism proper. Another portion does not share in this transposition outwards; it remains inside the organism and, with the help of the accompanying sexual excitation […], becomes libidinally bound there. It is in this position that we have to recognise the original, erotogenic masochism’ (6). 

Freud as a rule keeps the expression ‘aggressive instinct’ (Aggressionstrieb) for that portion of the death instinct which is directed outwards, with the help, in particular, of the muscular apparatus. It should be remembered that for Freud this aggressive instinct (in the same way perhaps as the tendency towards self-destruction) cannot be conceived of at all without envisaging its fusion with sexuality (see ‘Fusion/Defusion of Instincts’).
Psycho-analysts are given to conflating the opposition between life instincts and death instincts with that between sexuality and aggressiveness, and Freud himself occasionally endorsed this (1b). Such an assimilation calls, however, for a number of comments:
a. The facts invoked by Freud in Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920g) to justify his introduction of the idea of the death instinct are phenomena which give expression to the [[Compulsion to Repeat (Repetition Compulsion)|repetition compulsion]]–and this has no special affinity with aggressive behaviour.
b. Although it is true that certain phenomena which may be classed as aggressive become more and more significant in Freud’s eyes, these are without exception representative of aggression directed against the self: the clinical manifestations of mourning and melancholia, [[Sense of Guilt, Guilt Feeling|‘unconscious guilt feelings’]], the ‘[[negative therapeutic reaction]]’, etc.–such are the phenomena that bring Freud to talk of the ‘mysterious masochistic trends of the ego’ (7).
c. As for the notions involved here, the [[life instincts]] (or [[Eros]]) are certainly far more than just a new label for what has hitherto been referred to as [[sexuality]]. Indeed Freud means for ‘Eros’ to connote the whole group of instincts which create or maintain organic unities, and this group must eventually include not only the sexual instincts in as much as they tend to preserve the species but also the self-preservative instincts, which aim to maintain and assert the existence of the individual.
d. Similarly, the idea of the [[death instincts|death instinct]] is not simply a generic concept designed to cover indiscriminately everything formerly designated as aggressiveness (and nothing else). As a matter of fact one part of what may be called the struggle for life certainly belongs to Eros. Conversely the death instinct may lay claim (no doubt in a more emphatic way) to that aspect of human sexuality which Freud had recognised as definitive of human [[Wish (Desire)|desire]]: its ineradicability, persistence, unrealistic nature and–from the economic point of view–its tendency to reduce tensions to zero.

* * *

Exactly what revisions does the concept of aggressiveness undergo after 1920? The main changes may be summarised as follows:

a. The field in which aggressiveness is acknowledged to be at work is broadened. In the first place, the conception of a destructive instinct capable of directing itself first outwards and thence inwards once more allows the alternation of sadism and masochism to be treated as a highly complex reality which can account for many modalities of mental life. Secondly, aggressiveness is no longer evoked only in dealing with relationships with objects and with the self: it is now said to characterise relations between the different psychical agencies (notably the conflict between the super-ego and the ego).

b. By locating the original source of the death instinct in the subject’s own self, by making self-aggression into the very essence of all aggressiveness, Freud explodes the traditional definition of aggressiveness as a mode of relation to others typified by the expression of violence towards them. It is perhaps appropriate in this context to draw attention to the contrast between some of Freud’s declarations on the natural wickedness of man (8) and what is original in his own theory.

c. Lastly, does the final instinct theory permit us to draw a more specific distinction between aggressiveness and activity? Daniel Lagache has noted that ‘on the face of it, the concept of activity would appear to have a much broader extension than that of aggressiveness; all biological or psychological processes are forms of activity, so that, in principle, aggressiveness only covers certain types of activity’ (9). Now, in so far as Freud tends to place everything which can be called vital behaviour in the service of Eros, the question arises of what defines aggressive behaviour; the notion of fusion/defusion helps us to begin answering this question. For this conception does not merely imply that instincts may blend together in varying proportions–it further entails that defusion is basically a triumph for the destructive instinct, in that this instinct’s objective is to break up those unities which it is up to Eros to create and maintain. From this point of view aggressiveness must certainly be seen as a radical force for disorganisation and fragmentation. Naturally these trends have been underscored by those who–with Melanie Klein–insist upon the predominant part played by the aggressive instincts from earliest childhood onwards.
* * *

It will be noticed that Freud’s attitude, as outlined above, runs directly counter to the sense acquired in psychology by the terms derived from the root-word ‘aggression’. This is especially true of English usage: in their Comprehensive Dictionary of Psychological and Psychoanalytical Terms, English and English note that aggressiveness has come to be used in a much weakened manner, and has so lost all suggestion of hostility that it expresses nothing more than a ‘tendency to be enterprising, energetic, active’; ‘aggressivity’, according to the same authority, has not lost so much of its force and remains closer to ‘aggression’, ‘to aggress’, etc. A final terminological point is that Freud’s mother tongue is able to use the one term ‘Aggression’ to refer to both aggressions in the sense of acts of aggression and aggressiveness as an inclination or state of mind. [Modern English psycho-analysis has of course followed this example: although the Standard Edition uses ‘aggressiveness’, ‘aggression’ is now almost universally accepted.–tr.]

(1) FREUD, S. New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (1933a [1932]): a) G.W., XV, 110; S.E., XXII, 103. b) Cf. G.W., XV, 109ff; S.E., XXII, 103ff.
(2) FREUD, S., letter to Fliess dated October 27,1897, Anf., 241; S.E., I, 266.
(3) FREUD, S., G.W., V, 281; S.E., VII, 117.
(4) FREUD, S. Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious (1905c), G.W., VI, 105; S.E., VIII, 96–97.
(5) FREUD, S. ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c): a) G.W., X, 214; S.E., XIV, 122. b) G.W., X, 230; S.E., XIV, 138. c) G.W., X, 231; S.E., XIV, 139.
(6) FREUD, S. The Economic Problem of Masochism’ (1924c). G.W., XIII, 376; S.E., XIX, 163–64.
(7) FREUD, S., G.W., XIII, 11; S.E., XVIII, 14.
(8) Cf. FREUD, S. Civilization and its Discontents (1930a).
(9) LAG ACHE, D. ‘Situation del’agressivité’, But. Psycho., 1960, XIV, 1, 99–112.