---
title: "Aim of the Instinct, Instinctual Aim"
tags:
- example-tag
enableToc: false # do not show a table of contents on this page
---

= D.: Triebziel.–Es: hito or meta instintual.–Fr.: but pulsionnei.=I.: meta istintuale or pulsionale. –P.: alvo or meta impulsor(a) or putsional.

Activity to further which the instinct exerts pressure and whose outcome is a resolution of internal tension; such activity is sustained and orientated by [[Phantasy (or Fantasy)|phantasies]].

The notion of the instinctual aim is bound up with Freud’s analysts of the concept of instinct under its different aspects: [[Pressure (off the Instinct)|pressure]], [[Source of the Instinct|source]], aim, [[object]] (1a, 2a).

In a broad sense, the term ‘instinctual aim’ might be said to be unambiguous: the aim in all cases is satisfaction-that is to say, according to Freud’s economic conception, a non-qualitative discharge of energy regulated by the ‘[[principle of constancy]]’. Yet even when he speaks of the instinct’s ‘final [[Aim of the Instinct, Instinctual Aim|aim]] (Endziet), Freud is referring to a specific aim tied to a specific instinct (2b). Such a final aim may itself be reached via means (or ‘intermediate aims’) that are more or less interchangeable; but Freud asserted the thesis of the specificity of aim of each [[Component (or Partial) Instinct|component instinct]] as early as the Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d): ‘The sexual aim of the infantile instinct consists in obtaining satisfaction by means of an appropriate stimulation of the [[Erotogenic (or Erogenous) Zone|erotogenic zone]] that has been selected in one way or another’ (lb). This idea seems to stem from the ‘Project for a Scientific Psychology’ (1950a [1895]), where it appears in the form of the ‘[[specific action]]’ which is alone capable of eliminating the internal tension. It is reiterated even more explicitly in the 1915 edition of the Three Essays: ‘What distinguishes the instincts from one another and endows them with specific qualities is their relation to their somatic sources and to their aims’ (1c).

By the same token these passages posit a close link between the aim and the source, which is generally represented by an erotogenic zone: in infantile sexuality, the ‘sexual aim is dominated by an erotogenic zone’ (1d). Or again: ‘The aim which each of [the sexual instincts] strives for is the attainment of “[[organ-pleasure]]” (Organlust)’ (2c). Thus the aim corresponding to the oral instinct would be the satisfaction associated with the activity of sucking. Conversely, it is through the instinctual aim that we can get to know the instinctual source, in the sense of the organic process which occurs in the erotogenic organ: ‘Although instincts are wholly determined by their origin in a somatic source, in mental life we know them only by their aims. […] Sometimes [the source of the instinct] may be inferred from its aims’ (2d).

The source is thus seen as the ratio essendi of the aim, and the aim as the ratio cognoscendi of the source. How are we to reconcile this strict reciprocal determination with the existence of those ‘deviations in respect of the sexual aim’ to which Freud devotes a whole chapter of the Three Essays! Freud’s goal in this section is to demonstrate–against the popular view–that [[sexuality]] covers a field very much wider than the adult sexual act which is usually looked upon as normal–i.e. limited to a sole source, namely the genital apparatus, and to a sole aim, namely ‘sexual union, or at all events actions leading in that direction’ (1e). The ‘deviations’ Freud lists are not modifications in the aim of one particular component instinct, but rather the varieties of sexual aims that are possible. These fall under two heads: they are either aims linked to sources–to erotogenic zones–other than the genital region (e.g. kissing, which is linked to the oral zone); or else they are modifications of the sexual act consequent upon a displacement of object. (Thus although Freud places fetishism among the ‘deviations in respect of the aim’, he concedes that it is in fact essentially a ‘deviation in respect of the object’ (1f).)

In ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c) the angle of approach is a very different one. Freud’s concern now is not to draw up an inventory of the variants of the sexual aim in general but to show instead how the aim of one specific component instinct can be transformed. With this as his perspective, Freud is led to draw a distinction between the auto-erotic instincts and those instincts which are directed towards the object from the start ([[sadism]] and the ‘scopophi!ic instinct’). For the former, ‘the part played by the organic source is so decisive that, according to a plausible suggestion of Federn and Jekels, the form and function of the organ determine the activity or passivity of the instinctual aim’ (2e). Only for the second type of instinct is that modification of the aim known as ‘[[Reversal into die Opposite]]’ possible (reversal of sadism into masochism and of voyeurism into exhibitionism); but it should be pointed out that this change of aim is once again closely tied to a change of object–namely, the process of ‘[[turning round upon the subject’s own self]]’ (2f).

In [[sublimation]], the modification of the instinct consists essentially in a change of aim; yet here too this change is conditioned by a transformation of the instinct’s other elements; the object is exchanged, and one instinct is supplanted by another (the replacement being an instinct of self-preservation with which the sexual instinct has been operating in [[Anaclisis; Anaclitic (or Attachment)|anaclisis]]) (1g, 2g).

Plainly, if we confine ourselves to the categories of which the Freudian theory makes explicit use, the notion of the aim must remain in a no-man’s-land between the notions of the source and the object of the instinct. Defined in terms of its close link with the organic source, the instinctual aim takes on a very clear-cut but somewhat feeble meaning: the aim is sucking in the case of the mouth, vision in that of the eye, ‘[[instinct for mastery|mastery]]’ in that of the muscular apparatus, etc. On the other hand, if each type of sexual activity is viewed–as the evolution of psycho-analytic theory encourages us to do–in its relation with the type of object striven after, then the notion of instinctual aim will tend to give way to that of ‘[[Object-Relation(ship)|object-relationship]]’.
* * *

No doubt a clearer light will be thrown on the problems besetting the idea of the instinctual aim in Freud’s work once the ambiguities in his concept of instinct itself have been brought out. For Freud places the sexual instinct and the instinct of self-preservation in the same category in spite of the fact that his whole theory of sexuality points to the profound differences which separate them in their functioning and–precisely–in their aims, i.e. in the path each of them follows to satisfaction.

The aim of a self-preservative instinct can only be conceived as a [[specific action]] which puts an end to a state of tension provoked by need, which can be located in a particular somatic apparatus, and which naturally requires the carrying out of an actual task (e.g. the provision of food). The aim of the sexual instinct, by contrast, is far harder to characterise. Indeed, precisely because this instinct is at first bound up, in anaclisis, with the self-preservative function, and only comes into its own by breaking this bond, it attains satisfaction through an activity which, though it bears the stamp of the vital function that has been its support, is nonetheless deviant, and profoundly perverted, relative to it. This rift becomes the point of emergence of a phantasy-activity that may involve ideational elements often very far removed from the corporeal prototype (see ‘Auto-Erotism’, ‘Anaclisis’, ‘Instinct’, ‘Sexuality’).


(1) FREUD, S. Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d): a) Cf. G.W., V, 34; S.E., VII, 135–36. b) G.W., V, 85; S.E., VII, 184. c) G.W., V, 67; S.E., VII, 168. d) G.W., V, 83; S.E.,VII, 182–83.e)G.W.,V,33;S.E.,VII 135.f)Cf.G.W.,V,52;S.E.,VII,153.g)Cf.G.W., V, 107;S.E., VII, 205–6.
(2) FREUD, S. ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c): a) Cf. G.W., X, 214; S.E., XIV, 121. b) Cf. G.W., X, 215; S.E., XIV, 122. c) G.W., X, 218; S.E., XIV, 125–26. d) G.W., X, 216; S.E., XIV, 123. e) G.W., X, 225; S.E., XIV, 132–33. f) G.W., X, 220; S.E., XIV .127, g) Cf. G.W., X, 219; S.E., XIV, 125–26.