---
title: "Foreword"
tags:
- example-tag
enableToc: false # do not show a table of contents on this page
---
This work deals with the chief concepts of psycho-analysis. It is based on a number of premisses:
a. Inasmuch as psycho-analysis has reshaped our view of most psychological and psychopathological phenomena, and even of man in general, an alphabetic manual aiming to cover all of its contributions might justifiably include not only libido and transference but also love and dreams, delinquency or surrealism. Our goal has been a quite different one: we have deliberately chosen to analyse the conceptual equipment of psycho-analysis–i.e. the whole set of concepts which it has gradually evolved in order to account for its own discoveries. This book deals, not with everything that psycho-analysis seeks to explain, but with the tools it uses in doing so.
b. It is now almost three-quarters of a century since psycho-analysis came into being. The psycho-analytical ‘movement’ has had a long and stormy history. Groups of analysts have been formed in many countries where the specificity of cultural factors could hardly have failed to exert an influence upon the actual concepts of the science. Rather than attempt to catalogue what seems, at any rate, to be a great multiplicity of usages, depending on place and time, we have sought to recapture the pristine novelty of Freud’s concepts, now often obscured or lost; consequently we have paid especial attention to their genesis.
c. This emphasis has led us to take Sigmund Freud’s pioneering work as our basic frame of reference. Any sample, any good cross-section of the massive literature of psycho-analysis clearly reveals how the great majority of its concepts originate in Freud’s own writings. This then is another respect in which this book differs from works of an encyclopaedic nature.
The same concern to rediscover the fundamental conceptual contributions of psycho-analysis has meant that some authors other than Freud have had to be considered. Thus–to cite but one instance–we have included a number of concepts introduced by Melanie Klein.
d. In the area of psychopathology our choices have been governed by three principles:
(i) The definition of terms coined by psycho-analysis, whether they are still in use (e.g. anxiety neurosis) or not (e.g. retention hysteria).
(ii) The definition of terms used by psycho-analysis in a way that differs, or which may at times have differed, from the generally accepted psychiatric usage (e.g. paranoia, paraphrenia).
(iii) The definition of terms which, though doubtless having the same sense for psycho-analysis as for clinical psychiatry, constitute the main axes of analytic nosology (e.g. neurosis, psychosis, perversion). Our aim was in fact to provide at least some points of reference for readers unfamiliar with clinical psychopathology.
* * *

The articles are arranged in alphabetical order. In order to indicate the connections between different concepts we have adopted two conventions: an explicit cross-reference to another entry or a q.v. means that the topic under discussion is also broached–and often more thoroughly treated–in the article referred to; an asterisk indicates merely that a term or expression is itself the subject of an article. The reader is thus encouraged to identify for himself the significant links between concepts, and to find his own bearings in the associative networks of the language of psycho-analysis. We hope by this means to have avoided two pitfalls: on the one hand, the arbitrariness that threatens a purely alphabetical classification and, on the other hand, the danger of dogmatism that so often besets expositions of the hypothetical-deductive type. It should thus be possible to discover groupings, internal relationships, and ‘nodal points’ which differ from those upon which systematic presentations of Freud’s teaching are based.
Each entry comprises a definition and a commentary. The definition seeks to sum up the concept’s accepted meaning as it emerges from its strict usage in psycho-analytic theory. The commentary constitutes the critical portion and the essence of our own work. The method we have applied here might be described under three headings–historical, structural and problematic. As to the historical, we have sought, without restricting ourselves to a strictly chronological presentation, to indicate the origins of each concept and the chief stages in its evolution. In our opinion this search for origins is more than an academic exercise: it is striking to see how the basic concepts are illuminated, how they regain their living contours, their definition, and how the links between them become clear, once they are shown in relation to the experiences which originally brought them into being, and to the problems that have punctuated and shaped their development.
Though presented separately in the case of each concept, this historical research naturally brings us back to the history of psycho-analytic thought as a whole. Such research must therefore consider the position of each particular element vis-à-vis the overall structure. In some cases this position seems easily ascertained, and is explicitly acknowledged in the psycho-analytical literature. Often, however, similarities, differences and connections, no matter how indispensable they may be if we are to grasp a concept’s originality, are merely implicit. To take some especially eloquent examples: the difference between ‘Trieb’ and ‘Instinkt’, which is vital in understanding psycho-analytic theory, is nowhere formulated by Freud. The contrast between the ‘anaclitic type of object-choice’ and the ‘narcissistic’ type, though adopted by most authors, is often considered without reference to Freud’s assertion which makes its meaning clear–namely, the thesis of the ‘anaclitic’ dependence of the ‘sexual instincts’ upon the ‘self-preservative’ functions. The relationships between ‘narcissism’ and ‘auto-erotism’, without reference to which we can tie down neither of these notions, quickly became obscured even within Freud’s work itself. Lastly, there are a number of structural phenomena which are much more disconcerting: it is not unusual in psycho-analytic theory for the function of specific concepts or groups of concepts to re-emerge at a later stage, transferred on to other components of the system. Only by offering an interpretation can we hope to trace certain constant structures of psycho-analytical thought and experience as they pass through transformations of this kind.
Our commentary has striven to dispel or at any rate to make plain the ambiguities of the principal notions, to expose their contradictory aspects. Usually these contradictions lead us to a problematic area that can be recognised in actual experience as well as on the level of terminology.
Less ambitiously, this discussion has also enabled us to air a number of purely semantic problems and to make a number of proposals designed to increase the coherence of psycho-analytical usage.

* * *

At the head of each entry we have listed the German (D.), Spanish (Es.), French (Fr.), Italian (I.) and Portuguese (P.) equivalents of the term in question.
Notes and references are placed at the end of each article. Notes are indicated by Greek letters, references by Arabic numerals.